---
layout: post
title: The Job Market
subtitle: Just a Game to be Played
---

You're probably reading this because you can't get that silly interview for that internship or entry level position. You probably spent a couple hours curating your resume to fit the needs of your desired firms and hearing nothing back from them. Well, I will tell you this right now, do not be discouraged. I'm not saying this to necessarily make you feel better. I am saying it as more of a slap in the face, because you genuinely can not afford to be discouraged. The more discouraged you are, the further you can fall behind. 

However, on a softer note, just remember it is not your fault. The oversaturated job market is to blame. 

For starters... breathe...Yes. Seriously...Just breathe. All will work out in the end. You will find your job. You will find your path. Once you do, that will most likely be for your whole life. So enjoy the journey. Enjoy the process. Romanticize it a bit. While I know and fully undertstand it is a stressful time, it is also quite an exciting time. New opportunities. New opening doors. You're young (or so I assume). The world is your oyster. Remember that. 

Now let me let you in on my experience with this job market. For introductions, I am an accounting major. I transferred from a community college to a four year university, and let me just tell you... the jump was insane. In community, all I ever focused on was school. Obtaining the grades, the units, the classes, simply in order for me to transfer. No clubs were joined. No internships were applied to. Just head down, doing what needed to get done.

Coming into university, things were getting much more serious. Although I was just now entering the univerisity, there is all this talk about now trying to leave. Trying to get the post grad job (like man... I just got here). I was just an incoming junior, with litte to no experience with internship recruitment. All I knew was that junior year is the prime time for getting those internships. This all freaked me out to say the least. I did nothing to prepare. So, as a solution I went full throtle. I joined three clubs. I went to networking events. Speaker Meetings. Spoke with industry professionals. Scheduled coffee chats. Attended mock interviews. All while balancing my part time waitressing job and trying to maintain those grades (and temporarily saying goodbye to those beloved hobbies). It's a lot. I know. And it all came at me full speed. However, the investments of time and effort I put into myself, and into recruiting, truly gave the rewarding return of internship offers that I so badly wanted. But this is what the job market has just become. Times are much different than they were before. The hiring process has changed immensely. All we can do is adapt, evolve, and hope.

Let's take a look at that (horrific) computer science job market for example. Not too long ago, technology was new and upcoming. This made the path of majoring in computer science relatively stable and safe, as there was so much to build off on. So much potential innovation and development. The knowledge was in high demand. Because of this mindset, everyone came flocking, oversaturating the market, increasing the competitiveness, and making companies in tech incredibly selective. It's rather funny, in a more *crying-in-pain* kind of way, to see the requirements of technical experience necessary for ***entry level*** positions. It is indeed the world we live in, and now, everyone is starting to understand that. So those technical skills are acquired and learned by almost everyone. That's where the competitiveness comes in, and where those networking skills really play the bigger role. But I'll get there. Just bear with me. 

It's a bit of a different story in the accounting realm. Ironically enough, accounting isn't all about hunching your back and staring at an excel spreadsheet for 40 hours a week. Surprisingly enough, it requires a lot more people skill than you'd realize. You need these skills for those one-on-one client interactions, and even just communicating and bonding with your team. As I went through multiple interviews and spoke with many accounting professionals, I've learned that what truly helps, is your people skills. That is the main thing interviewers look for. That's what really makes you stand out as a candidate. They always say that the technical skills (again, mainly in the accounting profession), can always be taught. It's hard to teach the personable skills. It's either just developed throughout time, or for some who are really lucky, are just born with the gift. So recruiters and interviewers really...and I mean really...eat that *sociability* up. So, don’t hesitate to showcase those two years of Chipotle burrito-wrapping skills or your months at Starbucks, where you perfected the art of creatively misspelling names on coffee cups. I know you don't want to showcase these experiences because it doesn't seem very professional per se, but it takes serious people-skills to work at those kinds of jobs, and that's what recruiters want to see. Remember, you are still young and entry level. They won't expect a whole lot of professional experience out of you anyways.

Same goes for interviews. Your people skills seriously come into play here. They are honestly just a vibe check. Checking to see if your so called *vibe* is cool enough to work with. Which from both perspectives, is understanable if you think about it. I mean, do you really want to work in a place where every encounter in the breakroom feels tense or forced? And on the flip side, do they want to spend 40+ hours a week with someone they can’t share an occasional laugh or two with? While these are just examples, I generally just speak of compatibility. A good interview, and a good company fit, is about finding that compatibility. So, remember, you’re interviewing the company just as much as they’re interviewing you. At the end of the day, a job is just a job. It's the people you work with. The people you trauma bond with. They are really what makes it or breaks it. 

Coming back to the topic of technical skills, at least in the accounting world, and as an intern... you don't really need it. It's definitely a different story for computer/data science and engineering, so keep that in mind. But one thing is for sure, for almost any field, especially nowadays, ***networking is everything***. 

> Your network is your net worth (or so they like to say).

I won't lie to you, this was an annoying concept to live by, mainly because I felt annoying to professionals. I felt fake in a way. But it really is true. There is so much value in networking. Build those connections. Speak with as many people as you can. I can not stress this enough. I know these words just sound repetitive, and I understand the desire to simply hear this and have it go out the other ear (believe me, I know), but it truly is so very important. People know people. And those people know more people. And those 'more' people know even more people. It can take one person to change the trajectory of your life and path. The more people you talk to and build *genuine* connections with, the better your chances are in moving your name along within companies and firms. The market has become incredibly *network-driven* where internal recommendations and referrals can almost always be prioritized, even over those who genuinely do have the credible technical experience. That just goes to show how important those connections are. So make that Linkedin. Get that headshot. And let's connect! 

That's kind of a joke. I mean, a Linkedn is still very important, but again remember, I also said *genuine* connections. While speaking with as many people as you can and getting those Linkedin connections are good and is a good step, forming those more quality connections is even better. If you think about it, it can be kind of fun too. These professionals out here, they are just people too, and you can have more in common with them than you think. Going to "Meet the Firms" and those career fairs are such a good segue into forming those relationships. I know it can be nerve-wracking seeing all these professionals and recruiters. But really, they are also just trying to get out of the office, have some fun, and speak with some potential co-workers. Here is the trick. Speak about the industry and job related topics for 30% of the time. The rest of that time is free game. Speak about anything you can connect with. Food. Sports. Hobbies. Interests. Pets. Travelling. Anything really. Just ease up and have some fun with it. You could make a friend and hopefully an eventual co-worker. 

Now I know this so-called *game* of recruitment just seems to be another part time job at this point, but you can sulk and complain all you want. No action means no movement. Simple physics, I know. But even the simplest of concepts like this are the hardest to truly grasp. The concept goes for anything in life really. But in the coporate or professional world at least, it really doesn't slide. At the same time, there's nothing necessarily wrong with that either. If it truly isn't the way you want to go about things or how you want to live your life, I understand. All it means is that you have and want a different path in life. At the end of the day, it all depends on how badly you want something. How bad do you want the job? How bad do you want to succeed? All I got to say is... if you do want it *that* bad, always remember to ***work hard*** but most importantly... ***Play harder***. 

